---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Jessie
author: Jamie
author_login: Jamie
author_email: me@jamie.ly
author_url: http://jamie.ly
wordpress_id: 4744
wordpress_url: http://jamie.ly/wordpress/?p=4744
date: 2013-02-23 22:31:15.000000000 -05:00
categories:
- Writing
tags: []
comments: []
---
When Jessie started worked for Mr. Humphrey, she had no idea how
she&rsquo;d come to feel about him. In the mornings, while she prepared
breakfast for the family, he&rsquo;d stomp down the stairs bracing the
laughing Robin upon his shoulders. How grateful My. Humphrey had always
seemed for the meal, as if it wasn&rsquo;t Jessie&rsquo;s job. The
timbre of small gratitudes ushered in his deep, smooth voice brought a
flush to her face.

It was a brisk Tuesday morning. After
she&rsquo;d seen Robin off at the bus stop, despite many chores waiting
for her at the Humphrey home, she started walking towards the office
where Mr. Humphrey worked. She had no specific aim, just hazy thoughts
about her employer and their relationship. When she got to the office,
she saw him through the large plate glass windows, and gazed at him for
a while hidden behind a newstand.

The next day, before Robin had
awoken, Mr. Humphrey came down the steps softly, meeting Jessie in the
kitchen. &ldquo;Jessie, can I speak to you for a moment about something
important?&rdquo; He said it softly and with a firmness that made
tightened Jessie&rsquo;s heart. &ldquo;Of course, what is it?&rdquo; she
worried. &ldquo;Did you go anywhere yesterday before I got home? Were
you home all day?&rdquo; Mr. Humphrey questioned.

Jessie&rsquo;s
hands started to sweat, and a different kind of flush conquered her
face. &ldquo;Yes, of course! I had so many chores to do, after I left
Robin at the bus stop, I came right back here.&rdquo; She hoped that he
would not ask her if she had been around his office.

Mr. Humphrey
brows furrowed, and his patient smile drooped at the corners.
&ldquo;Jessie, I have a daily morning ritual. Before I leave for the
day, I open my late wife&rsquo;s jewelry box, and I hold her favorite
pair of diamond earrings for a moment, while I think of the last time I
saw her wear them. It gives me some small comfort--enough to get through
the day without her.&rdquo; Jessie&rsquo;s brows raised and her lips
opened as if to say something, but she didn&rsquo;t have anything to
say. Mr. Humphrey&rsquo;s voice now became hard, and his eyes pierced
her, &ldquo;This morning, I opened the jewelry box, and the earrings
were gone.&rdquo;

---

Written as part of the 
[Hourly Story Seeds project](https://twitter.com/stiththompson). 
The motif was 
["Evading a direct answer which may trap one."](https://twitter.com/StithThompson/status/305497286551670784)
