---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Book Notes - The Swerve: How the World Became Modern (Chapters 1 - 5)'
author: Jamie
author_login: Jamie
author_email: me@jamie.ly
author_url: http://jamie.ly
wordpress_id: 4748
wordpress_url: http://jamie.ly/wordpress/?p=4748
date: 2013-03-13 07:00:08.000000000 -04:00
categories:
- Books
tags:
- book notes
- the swerve
comments: []
---
Notes for the book The Swerve: How the World Became Modern by Stephen
Greenblatt.

Preface 
-------

Greenblatt picked up Lucretius’ On the Nature of Things in a college
book sale. He was struck by the ideas it espoused, including ideas on
how to handle death. He had been fearful of death through his mother,
who used it as a manipulative device. He was intrigued that a book
written so long ago could contain ideas we might consider modern.

Chapter 1: The Book Hunter 
--------------------------

Poggio was the papal secretary, responsible for Latin correspondence.
When Pope John XXIII gets deposed, he finds himself in Germany without a
master. He goes looking for old manuscripts in monasteries. Hopefully
they’ve been copied faithfully throughout the centuries--he’s hoping to
find the words of ancient Rome.

Chapter 2: The Moment of Discovery 
----------------------------------

Certain rules of monastic orders accidentally led to their central role
as archivists for ancient texts. These rules included requirements for
literacy, the demand for books, and the spiritual importance of the
monotonous work of transcription. Unfortunately, scribes would sometimes
write over older texts to transcribe newer texts, at the direction of
the abbey librarian. Being a book hunter during the time wasn’t easy.
Although the priest Petrarch had made some amazing discoveries, Germany
and Switzerland were had remote monasteries that might yield greater
treasures. Poggio was uniquely suited to reclaim these ancient texts
since he was knowledgeable about the church, a gifted Latinist,
extremely charming, and a talented scribe as well. Greenblatt
hypothesizes that Poggio made his way to and charmed his way into the
library of the Benedictine Abbey of Fulda. There he would’ve found some
interesting works, the most important of which was Lucretius’s On the
Nature of Things.

Chapter 3: In Search of Lucretius 
---------------------------------

In Poggio’s time, Lucretius’ works were not well known (On the Nature of
Things) is the only one to survive to modern times. What they knew was
from small references by his contemporaries including Cicero, Ovid, and
Virgil. The discovery of Herculaneum, buried by Vesuvius with Pompei,
provided information about philosophical thought during that time. A
small private library was unearthed that contained intact papyrii. As
the Romans expanded their empire, they came to admire Greek art,
science, and philosophy. The rich and powerful used books as a status
symbol, and some amassed great libraries. Philosophical discourse was a
social affair. Cicero, in writing about his philosophical ideas, made it
a point to discuss the ideas of his colleagues, ideas that would’ve been
discussed together during gatherings. Greenblatt supposes that Lucretius
may have been at such a gathering at the library at Herculaneum.
Lucretius was inspired by Epicurius and his ideas of atoms and pleasure.
Although it is commonly believed that Epicuirius’ idea of pleasure
equates to that of the tantalization of the senses, evidence suggests he
led a simple, wholesome life. Documents from the library discuss that
pleasure in life comes not from indulgence, but a life of courage,
honor, duty, virtue, and temperance. The Epicurean idea of atoms and the
void provided an alternative to religious worship. Epicurus taught that
if a person was able to keep these ideas in his mind, he would have no
fear of the afterlife, and many of the pressures and stresses of life
would fall away.

Chapter 4: The Teeth of Time 
----------------------------

Only scraps of ancient learning have survived to the present day. The
majority of these are copies of original texts; the only originals left
have been found at a couple archaeological sites including Herculaneum.
Papyrus written on with a water-soluble ink was the popular medium,
susceptible to bookworms, storms and floods, and tears. There was a
thriving book industry in the ancient world. Copyists and scribes were
actively used to produce books, and there were book shops and public
libraries in major Roman imperial cities, including the most famous
library in history, the Library of Alexandria, which was more like a
university than a modern library. The book culture thrived until the
rise of Christendom after Constantine made it the official religion.
Greenblatt presents the fate of Hypatia, celebrated philosopher of
Alexandria, murdered by a Christian mob, as the beginning of the end of
intellectualism and the truce between paganism and Christianity. Notable
early Christian thought-leaders talked about the conflict between
classical pagan learning and leading a life in God’s grace. Although the
teachings of some of the Greek philosophers could be integrated into the
Church’s official teachings, Epicurus’ teaching that there was nothing
after death, and that life’s goal should be the pursuit of pleasure
could not be reconciled with Church canon. To combat Epicureanism, some
Christian leaders painted Epicurus and his followers as hedonists. The
Church also began to teach that the way to grace was through pain, that
life was about pain and not pleasure. Some saints and monastic orders
were regular practitioners of self-flagellation.

Chapter 5: Birth and Rebirth 
----------------------------

Poggio arrived in Florence penniless despite growing up with some
wealth; he had all the talents to succeed in Florence despite this. He
had excellent penmanship, which he used to pay for lessons to improve
his already proficient latin. He and some of his contemporaries were
instrumental in the design of the type known as roman. Petrarch and his
contemporaries popularized the revival of classical pagan literature.
While some believed that their civilization was a continuation of the
great civilizations that came before, those in Petrarch’s camp believed
that the empire was long dead and only shadows and fragments of it
existed. One of Petrarch’s closest students was Salutati. Poggio
eventually became a mentee of Salutati, the Chancellor of Florence. He
believed that Florence was the heir to ancient Rome, being an
independent city state run by an elected council. Salutati was a
brilliant politician who mentored not only Poggio but Leonardo Bruni,
who would become important in Florence later, and Niccolo Niccoli, who
had a great collection of antiquities and documents which he would
bequeath to start a public library. Lacking wealth or political
ambition, Poggio decided to head to Rome to find his calling.

