---
layout: post
title: On Learning Well
date: 2019-02-01 09:00:00
categories: life
tags:
  - swift
  - learning
  - memory
comments: false
---

I've noticed that as I get older the importance of learning increases.  Not
only do I find it more important to do my best to learn the fundamentals of a
topic, but also the desire to learn for its own sake becomes more and more
important.

# School

I've been in school the majority of my life. Two years after undergrad, I
started to pursue an MBA at Temple part-time. A year after completing it, I
enrolled at the University of Pennsylvania to complete a Master's Degree in
Computer Science part-time.

I finished the MSE program in 2013 and at the time I was honestly pretty
exhausted.  Although I loved to be in that atmosphere, learning new things,
relearning things, and enriching my existing knowledge, the amount of work and
coordination required was taxing. 

What the experience gave me was another chance to experience school without the
pressure that I'd had the first time around. Although I had many more
committments, I didn't ever think completing my MBA or MSE was necessary. That
meant that rather than focusing on grades, I could focus on the actual learning
experience. It was incredibly liberating. 

There are people that will say that you should focus on the learning and the
grades will come, but that's an easy statement to make. It's harder to live
that way, in practice. It's a bit like trying to live by the Golden
Rule--easier said than done.

# Fundamentals

Being in school so much has helped me to appreciate the fundamentals.  One of
the consequences of part-time schooling is that I only enrolled in one or two
classes at at time, giving me less to focus on. I remember an undergraduate
semester where I had six full CS courses--looking back on it, I don't think I
retained much from that semester. 

Taking fewer classs, I relied less on rote memorization and spent much more
time focusing on concepts. With less things to focus on, I actually managed to
do the things you are supposed to do like:

* Optional homework
* Full readings of the material (ahead of the class in which they were taught)
* Using tests in coding projects
* Going to office hours

In my non-academic life, I've also tried to continue to relearn and reinforce
fundamental knowledge through technical reading and watching Youtube videos
about math and computer science.

# At Work

At work it's common for the producers to learn only what is necessary to
complete their job. Although it's something I do, there are differences in the
bar of necessity from person to person. For example, I'm currently working on
my first [Swift](https://developer.apple.com/swift/) project, so there is a lot
of learning to do about the language. Even though I have written other native
iOS apps, I don't think I should just learn Swift and apply it to the patterns
and architectures I've used before. Instead, I'm not only going through the
[Swift book](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/), but also reading through
back-issues of Swift newsletters and checking out the most popular opensource
Swift projects [1].

While the standard for a Junior developer may be just to learn the language, as
I get more and more experienced, I find myself needing to know more and more.
The deeper I immerse myself into the ecosystem, the better my work, and the
fewer problems I have during development and maintenance. I think that people
(myself included) fail to hold themselves to an increasing standard of quality
and mastery. One of the things I have always told myself I should do and have
not yet done is to learn the basics of Java byte code.

I attribute most of this to a failure of will. We get into work, where we are
trying our best, and we have too much work to finish in a day, and we are
coming up against a deadline, and we are just trying to get home to whatever we
love. I am fortunate in that I love to learn, and I love to learn about things
that actually make me better at my job.

# In Life

Learning is something that everyone does. Whether it is learning a hobby, a
language, or a recipe, everyone learns. What is important to me is the process
of refinement of an existing set of knowledge. For example, a lot of people can
read and write, but how many actively try to improve those skils--how many
realize that those skills _can_ be improved?

Not only is the act of learning important, but the act of trying to learn, and
figuring out how to learn. Those can be suprisingly not trivial, especially
when the subject is even slightly tedious. Take learning to do a workout for
example. I may have to go to the gym, and even if I make it to the gym, I might
have to learn to use machines. I might have to plan the workout and researching
various exercises and equipment--this would be fairly tedious for me. Still,
trying to do these things would be worthwhile and valuable. There is immense
satisfaction in learning, but it can take will.

# The Loss of Memory

I've begun to notice that as I get older my memory is less keen. This is
especially true of the audiobooks that I listen to. I wouldn't even remember
some of the books I've listened to without keeping track of them in
[GoodReads](https://www.goodreads.com/). I assume that some of this applies to
the things I have and will continue to learn, although I haven't noticed
anything in particular.  Despite this, I have continued to consume them when I
have down time like in the car and while doing chores. Even if there is loss,
there is value in the learning. There is the will that one exercises in
learning, including the strain that accompanies comprehension. And I believe
there is some amorphous thread in every bit of learning that somehow weaves its
way into the gestalt that is consciousness.


[1]: https://github.com/matteocrippa/awesome-swift
