---
layout: post
title: "On Learning Well"
date: 
categories: life
comments: true
---

I've noticed that as I get older the importance of learning increases.
Not only do I find it more important to do my best to learn the
fundamentals of a topic, but also the desire to learn for its own sake
becomes more and more important.

# School

I've been in school the majority of my life. Two years after my college
graduation, I started to pursue an MBA at Temple part-time. A year after
completing it, I enrolled at the University of Pennsylvania to complete
a Master's Degree in Computer Science part-time. 

I recently finished the MSE program. I'm honestly pretty exhausted.
Although I loved to be in that atmosphere, learning new things,
relearning things, and enriching my existing knowledge, the amount of
work and coordination required was taxing. 

What the experience gave me was another chance to experience school
without the pressure that I'd had the first time around. Although I had
many more committments, I didn't ever think completing my MBA or SME was
necessary. That meant that rather than focusing on grades, I could focus
on the actual learning experience. It was incredibly liberating. 

There are people that will say that you should focus on the learning and
the grades will come, but that's an easy statement to make. It's harder
to live that way, in practice. It's a bit like trying to live by the
Golden Rule--easier said than done.

# Fundamentals

Being in school so much has helped me to appreciate the fundamentals.
One of the consequences of part-time schooling is that I only enrolled
in one or two classes at at time, giving me less to focus on. I remember
an undergraduate semester where I had six full CS courses--looking back on it,
I don't think I retained much from that semester. 

Taking fewer classs, I relied less on rote memorization and spent much
more time focusing on concepts. 


